---
layout: post
title:  "The bodily turn"
date:   2016-10-19 12:29:16 -0700
categories: games blog
---

A crucial turning point came from continuing to think about how action gameplay and context can merge to create a story in video games. In one entry I came to realize that my fascination with stories and interaction both flowed from the wellspring of digital characters–entities that the player controls. This became a focal point of design that let me merge my budding skills in programming and mathematics with my ideas about interaction. Designing characters remains my primary fascination with video games. It began with writing about how three-dimensional spaces are designed with a particular body in mind which explores and utilizes them.

My initial analysis compared two corporeal exhibits (an art-piece in a museum and a piece of sculpture in a city) with two virtual spaces to investigate how spatial design can affect the behavior of real human bodies and fake virtual ones. I will not dwell on the corporeal designs too long. I came to the conclusion the activity originates in, and is enabled by a body. Two considerations make corporeal bodily activity relatively uninteresting. First, the promise of pain or personal harm means that Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater is an outlandish view of what “real” skateboarding is–our nervous system makes certain kinds of activity risky and difficult when we’re stuck in our own bodies. Second, our identities also limit the range of our activities–mayhem and destruction available to us in Grand Theft Auto is less likely in our own bodies where our “good names” are at risk. As a result of this, I came to the conclusion that corporeal architecture tends toward inhibition in keeping with the delicate bodies that inhabit it: guard rails hem us in on balconies, walls enclose us in bathrooms, and police forces keep us looking over the shoulder. Of course there are good reasons for these things, but they are still fundamentally limiting.

Virtual spaces, on the other hand, tend toward facilitation. Every aspect of a well-crafted virtual environment is built to highlight and exploit the capabilities of bodies that inhabit it. Of course, the extent to which this is true can be a matter of style as well, and spaces in which bodies are mismatched or unsuited to their surroundings constitute another class of irony unique to interactive media. I tried to illustrate this understanding of spaces and bodies with two examples.

The first came from the competitive multiplayer game Halo 3. Familiar players will remember the map called The Pit, a hemmed-in, close-quarters arena with fast-paced combat. This is one of the finest maps in the game due to its claustrophobic architecture, but the appropriateness of the space is really a result of the capabilities of the Spartan body. The features of the Spartan body are largely a result of its current arsenal–the weapons a player is carrying. The Pit is littered with weapons that enable deadly close-quarters combat: the energy sword, shotgun, rocket launcher, and others. Achieving dominance in this space with these weapons is enabled by the way tight corridors, sharp turns and steep ledges with lots of intervening cover enable close-quarters fighters to close the gap. This connection is obvious to anyone familiar with the game, but as I’ve improved as a designer it has become clear that recognizing the obvious and keeping design principles simple is at the center of making good experiences. To touch on the example of irony I mentioned earlier, the placement of the overshield–perhaps the most valuable close-quarters combat item–is relegated to the longest corridor on the map, where players who attempt to claim it are very vulnerable to long-range attack. This mismatch between the capabilities of the Spartan body and the environment that encloses it creates tension, and makes the item itself a gamble, enhancing the overall experience.

I went back to Shadow of the Colossus (SotC) for a nice foil to this example. The expansive emptiness of SotC’s world bears a direct relationship to Wander and Agro. Wander’s superhuman abilities (like his sick vertical) are dwarfed, scaled back and made merely mortal in the huge spaces he sits in. This space is meant to complement the vastness of the colossi themselves–and the ‘vehicle’ (a body itself) of the horse Agro is necessary to traverse it. Importantly, the climbing feature serves a dual purpose in this space. First, to fully understand the space the player must climb a series of stone monoliths that allow Wander to gain high ground. These overlooks provide the most expansive views of the world; it is important that it is a view only, and that actually exploring the space is a strenuous and time-consuming task which must be done with the assistance of Agro. In addition, climbing is the slowest form of locomotion in the game. This is another example of irony, where a mismatch between Wander’s climbing capabilities and the environment that encloses him causes a feeling of being dwarfed by the landscape.

Looking back, I probably confused myself as much as I clarified any of my thoughts when writing all of this out, but that seems inevitable when one is learning how to express ideas. The time spent writing certainly wasn’t wasted. I had too much free time back then–but then again, who knows if I could have achieved what I have without it. Small journal entries like these are responsible for giving me the courage and focus to start learning how to make these dream a reality. I can see the seed of a tree that is still growing in this focus on bodies and how they influence the design of interactive spaces. I’ll write more about how this perspective developed and resulted in my first attempt at a 3D action game.
