---
layout: post
title:  "What is done and how it is done"
date:   2016-09-28 12:29:16 -0700
categories: games blog
---

I came to Arizona State University intending to learn how to develop video games or die trying. I now know a thing or two about making games. I had to begin studying Computer Science to do it. By 2012, the indie game scene had developed pretty completely, and somehow the DIY ethic embedded within it seeped into me–I knew I would want to ‘do it all’ if I created a game. Therefore, Computer Science. However, the decision also drew from what I still believe is a fundamental observation about video games: when they are interesting it is a result of the way a player interacts with them. This implies decision making, and this interactive decision making is usually called gameplay. This word was born recently, in the ’80s, coined by game developers. It effectively delineates the part of game design that distinguishes it from other mediums.

Anyway, it was clear to me that learning how to design gameplay implied knowing much more about computers than I did at the time, which was almost nothing. Up until then I had envisioned myself as a designer and writer who wanted to create narratives and embed them within game-worlds. Gradually I came to realize that in my very favorite games, a storyline and a contextualized visual world always took a back seat to interactive elements–and that these elements were most responsible for generating wonder and catharsis. Despite this apparent imbalance (indeed, conflict in the eyes of some), a marriage between the narrative impulse in ‘story games’ and strong interactive design would be my first major dream in game design. The reason I began writing with any regularity was because I started exploring my ideas about how such a unification could be achieved.

English was my favorite subject in high school, and I deeply enjoyed writing stylistic analyses for literature. I took it as an axiom that video games, as art forms, could be subjected to the same kinds of stylistic analyses. While my technical skills were in their infancy, I took to writing about how to understand stylistic choices in video games, especially in gameplay.

The first significant questions I posed: “…what gameplay can be intelligently designed to artistic effect in a video game? What causes which parts of a game to be artistic?”

That first question implies that gameplay is itself a piece of art, and I go on to define art as anything which “…involves the user.” This is the first in a series of hand-waving statements and definitions that make me feel very young. However, this does provide an important answer, which is that, in fact, any gameplay can be designed to have an artistic effect… we just don’t know what art is.

I provide the answer via the second question: art, and gameplay, must incorporate style, which I defined as “… a general term for something that enhances the feeling of the world.” Looking back, this is basically meaningless too; I had something in mind, but this definition is so unspecific that it doesn’t capture anything. I was just getting comfortable articulating my own thoughts and creating something coherent.

Still, I had pretty clear ideas about what style meant in the context of literature and other mediums, and these ideas informed how I would try to conduct a stylistic analysis of gameplay. Theoretically, I would ultimately be able to create a game based on this philosophy; the divide between this theory and praxis would cause me a lot of anxiety down the road, but more on that later.

I give a slightly more lucid operational definition of style as “… a set of choices made by the author with a purpose in mind.” I cite examples from other mediums such as vocabulary in writing, perspective in the visual arts, and tempo in music as examples of ‘elements’ which permit choice on the part of the artist. I conjure up another word to address the part about ‘purpose’: connotation. Stylistic choices come with a set of connotations that add up to express opinions and ways of framing the content being presented.

I was definitely thinking of words first and foremost in this way of stating things. Words do carry weight, contain subtleties that hold meaning-a babysitter can exhibit blatant disregard for a child, or a careless detachment from it, or a distracted attention to it. These all state similar ideas with varying degrees of severity, each of which changes our picture of the babysitter–which may be the same person from three perspectives. A common trend in pop music is reinterpreting (usually loud rock) songs with an acoustic guitar. The “acoustic version” usually has a subtly somber and subdued mood, often emphasizing lyrics that were previously underplayed. The change in instrumentation provides a new set of connotations, a new way to frame the piece for reinterpretation.

I wanted to know what the elements of gameplay were that provided connotation in this sense. This gets to the heart of a very important question in game design: Can we make a player feel something by making them do it in a video game? This begs other important and interesting questions that I tried to address by studying a miserable corner of academia, game studies. Probably the most fundamental: “Can we make a player do anything?” The answer I decided on is a resounding No, and the details of this is one of the most edifying and exciting features of interactive entertainment that I know of. More on this later.

The idea of connotation is connected to gameplay because the latter is considered inherently purposeful. For me, connotations bear messages because art is inherently communicative. This might have a deep connection to the fact that I consider myself a writer and a storyteller above all else. Art certainly need not serve this function, but it appears to be in my DNA so far as that goes. Next, I try to consider elements of gameplay that contribute to communicative goals.
