---
layout: post
title:  "In the colossi's shadow"
date:   2016-10-01 12:29:16 -0700
categories: games blog
---

The single game I can point to for my continued interest in video games is Shadow of the Colossus (SotC). This game bore heavily on my ideas about gameplay (and what a game should be in general) when I was starting college, and still does. I’ll try to give a quick run-down of my feelings and link these to specific statements I made at the time to trace the influence as best I can.

The first question I asked about my elements of gameplay: “To what degree can, or should What Is Done correspond to How It Is Done?” I respond that matching these two elements is a matter of style. “One could imagine a situation in which the inputting style differs from what a player could expect to see in such a situation, … a unique instance of video game irony.” This statement amounts to my critical analysis of SotC at that time.

The game is more or less a tragic drama in the Greek tradition, which I say to sound erudite. I connected some of my thoughts on this game and others to Aristotle’s dramatic theory later on, and was delighted by myself at the time. Still, the character the player inhabits is basically super-human in terms of physical and mental stamina, and the visual aesthetic of the game certainly evokes the image of an “ancient hero” that Achilles,  Heracles and other before initiated. Moreover, the main character exhibits some hubris in his quest and ultimately pays for it, and this is really the important point, going to the heart of what I think dramatic effect really is in most great games these days.

In the theater, dramatic irony derives from the audience having a greater knowledge of the plot than any one of the characters, so that they can “see it coming” in some instances. Consider the moment in Romeo & Juliet when Romeo kills himself before the audience, who know that Juliet is not dead, but sleeping. In video games, the audience and at least some of the characters are one and the same by virtue of interactive embodiment. Video games (especially role-playing games) have played with the fact that players “inhabit” the body of a character basically forever, and the “silent protagonist” of our favorite adventure games are really a tacit admission of this dichotomy between player and character.

As the effects of the character’s (and most importantly, the player’s) actions become apparent in the course of playing SotC, a strong form of dramatic irony begins to overtake the player, who is nonetheless compelled to physically complete the game in order to propel the narrative to climax and catharsis. This paradox–of the relative powerlessness implicit in dramatic irony coupled with the absolute agency of digital interaction–is exactly the kind of stylistic combination of What Is Done and How It Is Done I was getting at before. In fact, I can say with some certainty that the distinction between button inputs, physics and resources (health, grip stamina) as mechanistic forces guiding the character Wander and the conceptualizations behind those actions (killing colossi, saving the princess, even simpler predicates like running and jumping) directly inspired my ideas of those two elements.

I feel as if What Is Done may appear not to have anything to do with “gameplay” as I defined it earlier, as a decision making process. I believe in some cases this is true, as it is in SotC. SotC is an essentially linear game; decision making in terms of “plot” as the designers conceived it is nil. In games with a karma system, like Fable, What Is Done may have a tangible effect on the world itself. However, this is only a more general form of What Is Done. Another answer I gave to the question at the beginning of this post is: “…How It Is Done could be translated to an entirely separate context to indicate a symbolic kinship and possibly evoke emotions from the player triggered during that past circumstance.”

In SotC, one mechanic in particular inspired this interpretation of What Is Done, namely to inform “… how the player views characters, themselves, and the setting.” The fundamental mechanic of SotC is gripping climbable surfaces. How It Is Done is by holding the R1 button… and holding the R1 button more. What Is Done is that the character clings to a nearby climbable surface. Essentially, the gripping mechanic can be viewed as a gigantic extended metaphor for the relationship of the protagonist to his moribund companion, the girl he is attempting to resurrect. Rather than letting go and accepting her death, he enters into a Faustian bargain and commences to physically cling to everything in the entire game, in the name of her memory. The emotional tension behind this action increases while the character spirals into ruin, until the climax of the game, where the final futile moments consist of clinging to a staircase as gale-force winds pull the player away from his partner, the girl. In that moment, all of the agency, all of the meaning, all of the power of How It Is Done and the agency that it brought the player in felling sixteen monumental colossi, is packaged up into those moments of clinging and made ineffectual. This was the motivation behind my idea of translating bits of gameplay above for dramatic effect. This is really a form of irony too, where the expectation behind a particular action is built up throughout the game, then betrayed or changed at some other point.

The most important point, however, is that SotC showed me ways to take interactive elements and make them contributors to, if not the focus of a completely new kind of narrative. I carry this torch to this day. This was me trying to suss out that idea before I knew a thing about actually creating games. This is me trying to hold onto it.
